# Installation

Version in Ubuntu repository is old, install from Docker repository. See
<https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/>


## Prepare System
If you are setting up docker on a server or NAS,  
You should have a **static IP address**, without DHCP.  
No, you can't use a reserved DHCP address, use static.  
This prevents wonky network problems with Docker.

    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install \
    apt-transport-https ca-certificates \
    curl software-properties-common

## Add Docker’s official GPG key
    curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo apt-key add -

## Set up the stable repository
    sudo add-apt-repository \
    "deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu $(lsb_release -cs) stable"

## Install Docker Engine

    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install docker-ce

## Test it
    sudo docker run hello-world

## Run docker as non-root user

    # Create the docker group.
    sudo groupadd docker
    
    # Add yourself to the docker group.
    sudo usermod -aG docker $USER

Log out and log back in.

## Install Docker-Compose

Go to <https://github.com/linuxserver/docker-docker-compose/> and check
for the latest release. The example here is for release 1.27.4-ls17

    sudo curl -L --fail https://github.com/linuxserver/docker-docker-compose/releases/download/1.27.4-ls17/docker-compose-amd64 -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
    sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose



### Get your user and group id and timezone
Many docker-compose files require your uid/gid and timezone

    id
    uid=1000(fred) gid=1000(fred) groups= etc...

Get your timezone, for example

    timedatectl | awk '/Time zone:/ {print $3}'
    
    # displays  America/New_York

### Prevent bogus "Network Disconnected" Popups
NOTE: This does not seem to be a problem on Linux Mint 21
Tell NetworkManager to ignore docker0 and any bridge network.

    sudo vi /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf 

Add this:

    [keyfile]
    unmanaged-devices=interface-name:docker0;interface-name:br*

Explanation:

- Docker creates an interface "docker0" when the computer boots.
- When you **run** Docker apps, docker creates a **bridge** network
  "br-xxxx" (xxxx is a random string)
- NetworkManager detects these, and tries to "manage" them.
- It "helpfully" tries to assign an IP address via DHCP

- When you **stop** docker apps, the **bridge** is **destroyed**
- NetworkManger announces a **generic** "Network Disconnected" popup.
- This makes you think your **actual** network is down, but it's not.

- Docker also creates a bunch of "virtual ethernet interfaces" named
  "vethxxxx"
- NetworkManager ignores those by default, so no action needed.

History has taught us that dynamic network managers, like
NetworkManager, dhcpcd, and connman, should not be in the business of
managing bridge networks created by things like Docker and OpenVPN.
