# Guest Shares

- available to **everyone** on your network without username or password.
- easy to set up, easy to use, but **not very secure.**

## Example: Public folder
Most Linux desktop systems have a Public folder in your home directory.

Replace **fred** with your Linux user name.

### Read-only

```
[Public]
    path = /home/fred/Public
    read only = yes
    guest ok = yes
    force user = fred
```
### Read/Write
```
[Public]
    path = /home/fred/Public
    writeable = yes
    guest ok = yes
    force user = fred
    create mask = 644
```

### Read/Write, no delete
```
[Public]
    path = /home/fred/Public
    writeable = yes
    guest ok = yes
    create mask = 664
    force directory mode = 3777
    inherit owner = yes
```
Set directory permissions:
```
chmod 3777 /home/fred/Public
chmod o+rx /home/fred
```

## Hiding the share
- Add `browseable = no`
- Share can only be accessed **explicitly** with `\\hostname\Public` (Windows)
or `smb://hostname/Public` (Linux)

## Notes
**force user = fred**
- This allows guest users to "traverse the file system" (as fred),
so you don't need to worry about directory permissions.
- Also, any files created by guests will be owned by "fred"
- Without this setting, files would be owned by the Linux user "nobody"
- It's highly annoying to have files in your home directory that you don't own.

**read only** and **writeable** are "inverse synonyms". For the best clarity:
- If you want read-only, use "read only = yes" (even though that's the default)
- If you want read-write, use "writeable = yes" (more clear than "read only = no")

**create mask = 644**
- Without this you'll get strange file permissions.
Things like text files marked as executable
- the create mask prevents files from getting set executable

**read/write no delete**
- directory permissions are 3777, everyone full access, enable SGID and "sticky bit"
- `inherit owner = yes`: as soon as guest creates a file, it gets owned by "fred" user.
- SGID ensures files are owned by "fred" group
- "sticky bit" prevents users from deleting files they don't own.
- the guest user won't own any files and thus cannot delete them (due to the "sticky" bit)
- we can't use "force user" here
- the guest user must be able to "traverse the file system" to `/home/fred/Public`,
including **all parent directories**
- that's why you need to `chmod o+rx /home/fred`

