# Authenticated Shares
- needs username and password to connect

## Home Directory
- Share your entire home directory, read/write
- Only you can get to it, using your Linux username and password.

Replace **fred** with your linux username.
```
[fred]
    path = /home/fred
    writeable = yes
    create mask = 644
    valid users = fred
```

Create Samba user/password
```
sudo smbpasswd -a fred  # Replace fred with your linux username.
```
It will prompt for a password. Use the same password as your Linux password,
unless you want confusion.

NOTE: Samba has a special `[homes]` share, but it's best suited to a NAS,
not a single user workstation.

## Other Authenticated Users
Example: Fred wants to share some files with Wilma.  
But, he doesn't want to give out his own username and password.

### Create New user

Two ways to do this:
1. Create a regular user account with either a Gui tool or cli.
2. Create a "system" account with the cli

Method 1 allows user to log on to the Linux box, and run commands  
Method 2 does not. But it does allow Samba access.

Fred doesn't want Wilma logging on to his box and running commands.

    sudo useradd --system --shell=/usr/sbin/nologin wilma
    # Note: you might need /usr/bin/nologin. check /etc/password for examples
    
    sudo smbpasswd -a wilma

Enter the password. Give it to Wilma

Create directory. For example: `mkdir /home/fred/flintstones`

```
[Flintstones]
    path = /home/fred/flintstones
    writeable = yes
    force user = fred
    create mask = 644
```
All files created by wilma will be "owned" by fred.

### Variation 1 - Only fred can Write

```
[Flintstones]
    path = /home/fred/flintstones
    writeable = yes
    create mask = 644
    write list = fred
```
Note - file permissions:
- cannot use "force user" when you use "write list"
- make sure directory permissions are correct.
- "wilma" must be able to "traverse the filesystem"
to the shared directory, including all "parent" directories

Fix permissions if needed:
```
chmod o+rx /home/fred
chmod o+rx /home/fred/flintstones
```

### Variation 2 - "no clobber"
- Fred and Wilma can create files and directories
- They can read each others files
- but they can only modify/rename/delete **their own** files/directories

In this variation, any files that wilma creates are owned by the wilma Linux user.
It's best to use a directory that's outside the home directory. You don't want to
have files in your home directory that you don't own. Linux provides a /srv directory
that's intended for this purpose.

```
sudo mkdir /srv/flintstones
sudo chmod 1777 /srv/flintstones
```

Share definition
```
[Flintstones]
    path = /srv/flintstones
    writeable = yes
    create mask = 644
    force directory mode = 1777
```
This sets the "sticky bit" on this directory and all subdirectories.
The sticky bit allows only the "user owner" to modify/rename/delete.
