# Technical Details

## Client and Server
There are 2 main components: **libsmbclient** and the **samba** package
- **libsmbclient** enables Linux to connect to SMB servers
- **samba** is the server component: serves files to other SMB clients.
- libsmbclient is usually installed by default, but samba is usually not.

## SMB protocol
- SMB1 (1983) File sharing, with integrated Discovery method (NETBIOS)
- SMB2 (2006) File sharing only, and separate Discovery service (WS-Discovery)
- SMB3 (2012) same as SMB2, with security improvements

Samba supports SMB 1 2 and 3, but does not provide WS-Discovery.  
You need a 3rd party application such as https://github.com/christgau/wsdd

Windows 10 no longer supports SMB1 by default, due to security issues.  
You can enable it manually, but system updates sometimes disable SMB1, without telling you.

Samba, from version 4.11 disables SMB1 by default, but you can enable it and it will stay enabled.  
However, at some point, Samba may remove SMB1 entirely.

## Linux clients - bug
As of April 2023, There is a long standing bug in **Linux clients**.  
it's the **gvfs-smb-browse** library.

When using Gui file manager - Browse Network:

- if click on a host (Linux or Windows) that does not run **SMB1**, you've got problems.
- you'll get a login dialog, even if the host has only one **guest** share which doesn't require a login.
- No matter what you do, you get an error: **failed to retrieve share list from server**
- The share list does not display, it goes into a login loop...
- However, you can access the share by putting it **manually** in the location bar.
- Example: `smb://hostname/Public` - this works as expected
- also, smbclient can list shares `smbclient -L 192.168.1.10 -N`

The problem: gvfs-smb-browse is using SMB1 to get the list of shares from a SMB server.  
The actual file sharing uses SMB2 or higher.  
There are patches for gvfs-smb-browse that will eventually get merged into the main codebase.  

For now, set `server min protocol = NT1` in /etc/samba/smb.conf
Also need `nmbd.service` running.

## Users
- All file access is ultimately controlled by the Linux username and Linux file permissions.
- Samba **maps** an incoming Windows user to a Linux user.
- But, Windows and Linux use entirely different "user authentication" methods.
- Samba has NO access to Linux passwords.
- Samba uses its own database to deal with passwords.

- Windows automatically sends the windows username and password when you click on a share
- Samba therefore checks each incoming connection against its own user/password database.

| incoming user         | password  | result                                           |
|-----------------------|-----------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Not in Samba database | N/A       | guest, map to Linux user "nobody"                |
| In Samba database     | correct   | map to Linux user with same name as Windows user |
| In Samba database     | incorrect | Ask Windows user for password                    |

- The Linux "nobody" user is an actual valid Linux user, (see /etc/passwd)
- You can force connections to be guest (even if client is in the Samba database

    guest ok = yes
    guest only = yes

- There's no easy way for Windows users to set their own password on Samba.

## File permissions
- All file access ultimately depends on a **Linux** user and the **Linux** file permissions.
- Samba file sharing can be MORE restrictive but NEVER less restrictive
  than underlying Linux file permissions.

Ubuntu since 21.04 changed the default permissions on home directories from 755 to 750 
so only the owner of the home folder can access anything under it.  

This is a problem if you want to share folders in your home directory, 
unless it's a private share that only you can get to.

Solution 1:
change permissions so other users can "traverse the file system" to the shared folder.
    chmod 755 /home/fred
    chmod 755 /home/fred/somefolder

Solution 2:
set `force user = fred` in the share definition (/etc/samba/smb.conf)
This is especially useful for guest shares.

## Windows File Attributes
Windows files have 4 "attributes" that don't exist in Linux file systems.  
(Read-only, System, Hidden, Archive). These attributes have existed since the DOS days.

Historically, Samba stored DOS attributes in Linux file permissions.

| DOS Attributes | Unix Permissions |
|----------------|------------------|
| Read-only      | Owner write      |
| Archive        | Owner execute    |
| System         | Group execute    |
| Hidden         | Other execute    |

This has an unfortunate side effect:  
Things like plain text files will show as **executable** on Linux.  

Modern Linux file systems have "extended file attributes".  
Samba uses these to store DOS attributes.

But files are still created with execute bit(s) set.

To combat this problem, set `create mask = 644`  
This prevents files from being executable.  

Note: Samba since 4.9:
- "store dos attributes" defaults to "yes".
This map DOS attributes to Linux "user extended attributes"
- "map archive" defaults to "yes".
This maps the DOS "archive bit" to the Linux "owner execute" bit
- The manual says the "map archive" setting is considered "no"
if "store dos attributes" is set
- This is not exactly true.
see https://lists.samba.org/archive/samba-technical/2020-May/135273.html

You need to either:
1. set a `create mask`
2. explicitly set `map archive = no`

## Different Usernames on Windows and Linux

Windows usernames can contain spaces: Fred Flintstone.  
Linux usernames cannot contain spaces.  
Samba can use a mapping file to deal with this.  
Enable the mapping file by adding the following to the "global" section of smb.conf

    username map = /etc/samba/smbusers

Edit /etc/samba/smbusers

To fix things for Fred, add

    fred = "Fred Flintstone"

You can also map multiple Windows users to one Linux user

    fred = "Fred Flintstone" wilma pebbles dino

Be aware, this is a GLOBAL setting, so "wilma" will ALWAYS be mapped to
"fred", if a password is required, wilma needs to use **fred's** password.

A more flexible way to do a similar thing, is create a Linux group, say
"family", and add fred, wilma, pebbles and dino to this group. You can
use group ownership / permissions at the Linux file level and can use
"valid users = @family" in Samba share definitions.

## homes share
This is intended for NAS boxes, with multiple user accounts.  
You see a "homes" share in the client-side file manager.  
Click on this and it puts you in your home directory on the Samba box.

In practice, when you click on "homes", it often errors out.  
It all depends on user accounts and passwords on the client and server.
Sometimes, no matter what you do, you have to manually enter `\\host\fred`

For a single user desktop system, "homes" creates more problems than it's worth.

But if you insist:

    [homes]
        browseable = yes
        read only = no
        valid users = %S

Setting `browseable = no` makes the share hidden.  

## Valid Share Names

Share naming conventions for Samba are generally the same as for Windows.

For best results, use only: letters, numbers, underscore, dash

- Must be unique for the server.
- Not case-sensitive.
- Maximum length is 80 characters.
- Unicode characters are supported.
- Share names ending with the `$` character are hidden shares.
- `ADMIN$` and `IPC$` are reserved share names.
- Share names can contain spaces, but cannot begin or end with a space.
- You must enclose share names containing a space in quotation marks.

## tdb files
- TDB (Trivial DataBase ) Files store some information needed by Samba.
- found in /var/lib/samba
- can be manipulated with the following tools:

`tdbtool tdbdump tdbbackup tdbrestore`
